Deuteros: a software for rapid analysis and visualisation of data from differential hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry

Andy M Lau1; Zainab Ahdash1; Chloe Martens1; Jurgen Claesen2; Argyris Politis1
1King's College London, London, United Kingdom; 2Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium

Introduction
Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) has emerged as a powerful structural biology technique for determining protein-protein and protein-ligand interactions. The deuteration profiles of proteins reflect both their solvent accessibility and hydrogen bond interactions, and thus contain structural and dynamical information regarding proteins and their binding partners. However, the analysis and interpretation of HDX-MS datasets remain challenging due to the lack of software that can process data independent of the instrumentation. The size and complexity of HDX-MS datasets makes the visualization of significant changes difficult. To the best of our knowledge current approaches do not provide support for all platforms without substantial manual intervention.

Methods
To simplify the HDX-MS analysis workflow, we have developed Deuteros for the rapid visualisation of differential HDX-MS data. Deuteros has been designed with usability in mind, and allows users to quickly display their data as a linear coverage map, in a Woods plot format, aggregate data in the form of ‘Sum’ data and perform peptide filtering via a user-defined confidence interval. Additionally, Deuteros can output HDX-MS data into a highly customisable PyMOL script for further visualisation onto model structures. The input data can be sourced from any mass spectrometer regardless of instrumentation or post-acquisition softwares and is available for both Windows and Mac OS systems.

Preliminary Data
To demonstrate the capability and usability of Deuteros, we have acquired differential HDX-MS data for a number of biological systems including protein-protein, protein-ligand and membrane protein complexes. We have assessed the usability of the software using systems of increasing complexity. These systems include both soluble (BSA, Cop9 Signalosome) and membrane-embedded protein complexes: AcrB from the resistance-nodulation-division (RND) family and lactose permease; LacY, xylose permease; XylE and GlpT from major facillitator superfamily (MFS) of transporters. This enabled us to rapidly analyse differential HDX-MS data, to quickly map significant changes onto known structures, and evaluate peptide deuteration profiles. Deuteros allows users to quickly access the biologically-interesting features of HDX-MS data. For instance, we were able to capture the conformational dynamics of a large 14-protein, 0.5 MDa Cop9 Signalosome in complex with a Cullin-Ring Ligase, revealing significant interaction interfaces. We assessed the usability of Deuteros in a systematic review of four membrane proteins and their mutant variants. Moreover, we assessed the significance of changes per peptide and per time point using a 99% confidence interval, in-built in the software. By projecting significant deuterium uptake changes onto their structures, regions protected and deprotected by mutations were quickly visualised. Processing time for multiple proteins can be performed on the order of minutes, emphasising the general utility of Deuteros in analysing proteins and their complexes.

Novel Aspect
Deuteros is a fast and lightweight software for performing downstream data analysis from hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry.